[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Today you are listening to a special
episode of the podcast. It was recorded
live at the future proof conference in
Huntington Beach.
>> Yep. We're going to be speaking with
former Dallas Fed President Robert
Kaplan. He is now vice chairman of
Goldman Sachs. Again, this was recorded
live on stage at Future Proof. So, take
a listen.
>> All right, let's uh just kick it
straight off. That jobs report that we
got last week, in your view with your
Fed hat on, maybe is a is a 50 basis
point rate cut in play for the next
meeting? I think 50 basis points is
still unlikely. I think we've been of of
the view for the last few months the job
market was weak. This latest report was
a little weaker. Having said that, the
reason 25 is more likely than 50 is it
wasn't the jobs market is not falling
off a cliff. We didn't get shrinkage and
inflation is running at 2 and 3/4 to 3%
above target. And so it sort of puts a
little bit of a headwind on doing more
than 25 basis points.
>> I mean, I take your point, but the
report was still a huge surprise. So if
you were in the newsroom when that
number came out, just 22,000 jobs added,
there was a sort of collective gasp
because it was way below basically the
entire range of expectations for that
particular month. If you're at the Fed
and you see a number like that, what
does 22,000 actually tell you? or are
you sitting there going, "Well, maybe
I'll wait for the revision until I
really make up my mind."
>> I don't know that the weakness in the
jobs market was a big surprise to the
Fed. They didn't know exactly what the
number would be, but they expected to be
anemic. The the reason uh that the
unemployment rate has stayed low is we
are not we've shut down undocumented
immigration. We have not ramped up legal
immigration. And as you well know, we
are deporting some number of workers and
chilling
10 to 15 million undocumented immigrants
who are in the workforce and some
percentage of them are not going to
work. And so supply is anemic. We've
thought for the last few months that
hiring was kind of we said at stall
speed. You should assume if GDP growth
is one and a quarter one and a half%
hiring is going to be anemic. So, we
could debate the number, but I I don't
think it was a big shock that it was
weak. And I think it wouldn't surprise
me to see the next number also
lethargic. Uh so why aren't we falling
off a cliff? Uh we still are running a
large deficit. We have tax incentives
coming. We're in the middle of an AI
data center power boom as you just heard
about in the previous session. And I
think that's still bolstering the
economy. Well, then let me take the flip
side of Tracy's question because okay,
maybe setting aside reasons for concern,
the flip side, as you mentioned,
inflation still running above target by
most measures. The stock market, I
haven't actually I don't know what it's
doing today, but it's very close to
all-time highs regardless of what it's
doing today. All kinds of people are
having a really nice time on the beach
in Southern California. What is the
evidence that as currently standing that
Fed policy is actually restrictive?
Clearly the FOMC has come around to this
view of cuts. It seems like cuts are
locked in, but you don't have to have
the FOMC view anymore. Like is it
obvious that cuts are needed at this
point?
>> Yeah, I I think if it were not for the
weakness that we've seen in the labor
market, the Fed would want to stand,
Pat, because we are it's one thing to be
above your inflation target. We're not
moving toward the inflation target,
right? We're going sideways to backing
up, but with this weak labor market, I
think it brings the fact you need to cut
into play. Now, what's the neutral rate?
I think the neutral rate today, uh, you
got a 2 and 3/4% inflation rate, 75
basis point real Fed funds rate means
the neutral rate to me is around 3.5%.
We don't have a lot of space to cut to
get to neutral, but I think you've got
75 to 100 base points. I think the goal
of the Fed will be cut in September,
stay restrictive, and if the labor
market stays weak, keep going. If it
stabilizes, then then you have the
option to to hold off. Um, and and I
think that's what they'll do.
>> Um, just going back to financial
conditions and stock markets at all-time
highs. I mean, if the Fed cuts at this
current juncture, you know, call it an
insurance cut or whatever, but if the
economy reacelerates after that,
>> which it may.
>> Yeah. Which it may, would you be worried
about that side of the outcome given
that, as you said, inflationary
pressures seem to be going sideways to
possibly up.
>> Yeah. So, a lot of people look at
financial conditions and see see it as a
reason the Fed shouldn't act. I actually
come at it from someplace different. The
economic statistics are reflective of
what's going on right now. In fact, even
more than that, what has gone on, not
even what's going on right now. The
stock market and other financial markets
are a assessment of what's going to
happen for the next 3 to 5 years. We, as
we know, we're in the middle and the
early innings of an AI data center power
boom. I don't think it's showing up yet
in product in a lot of productivity, but
I think a year or two from now it will.
The stock market, rightly or wrongly, I
think is making that bet. It's betting
that productivity is going to improve.
Corporate earnings are going to get
better. You you're not seeing it show up
in the current economy. The Fed's job is
to look at financial conditions, but but
adjust policy based on the current
economy, uh, not the bet the market's
making for two or three years. I'm glad
you brought that up about uh the AI
boom, the power, the data center boom
and so forth and that it's not showing
up yet in productivity, but it may be
showing up in greater strain on the
grid. It may be showing up in greater
strain on um certain electrical gear
that's necessary that's been in shortage
for all manufacturers for years now.
That's right. As of right now in
September 2025, could we say that if
anything the AI boom is like sort of
having a crowding out effect or slightly
inflationary where the costs right now
just on a static extent setting aside
the bet are a bit of a drag.
>> There are two big structural initiatives
that are being pursued by this
administration. One is regulatory review
and regulatory relief because they want
to ease the speeding to adoption of AI
and get more capital available. But the
second thing is there's an extensive
re-review of the power grid. We are
behind China
in having enough power to fund the AI
explosion. We've got to invest more in
geothermal, more modular nuclear. We
need to make it easier to run a
refinery, make it easier to do
transmission. And I think you're going
to find there's going to be enormous
efforts because we are behind. And in
some states, to your point, there is a
crowding out. And I think people are
afraid at some state states, the leaders
are afraid to take more data centers for
fear it's going to crowd out
individuals. So this is a big structural
initiative that isn't getting in the
press a lot, but it's a big initiative
going on in this country. That's a
dramatic change and it's needed.
>> What does that actually mean for Fed
policy? Because if I think about this
crowding out idea and all the demand for
databases and the things that power
them, we have seen electricity prices
start to go up. I know the Fed the Fed's
preferred inflation measure is X energy
and food prices. But on the other hand,
electricity prices feed into the cost of
pretty much everything. And also, this
doesn't seem like a bottleneck that
we're going to be solving, you know,
within the next two or three years or
even 10 years to be frank. If you're at
the Fed right now and you see
electricity prices going up, how are you
thinking through that pressure?
>> So, let me put it in context. There are
crossurrens, uh, I mean real
crossurrens. You just mentioned one. On
the one hand, you've got the government
is trying to reduce government directed
spending and replace it with more
incentives, tax incentives. Obviously,
the tariffs have been put in place.
Those are slowing growth and they have a
tendency to raise costs. They might be
one time on the labor force. As I just
mentioned, we are actually uh
decelerating and reducing labor force
growth because of immigration policy.
That's actually helping us be at full
employment and the Fed's been taken by
that, but also makes prices stickier,
wages stickier. At the same time, you
just said you've got these booms in AI
and the grid, and you've got uh uh we
don't we need more labor, we need more
power, and that actually stresses
prices. So, when you're at the Fed, when
you've got this kind of confusion, I
think that's one reason why they've done
nothing so far this year. But I think
the labor market is forcing their hand
where if it gets even weaker, they
really don't want that. And that's why
they're acting.
[Music]
Let's talk about AI and China a little
bit more. You mentioned the power
element and there are a lot of people
anxious about the constraints on the US
grid and you all these big capex numbers
and can the grid even support that. What
else is different besides the
electricity component? Because some
people we've talked to talk about
there's a very different attitude
towards the tech diffusion particularly
out of China or supply chains that run
through China.
>> So uh and I just got back from Asia and
I was in China last week. When we talk
about AI, we tend to look at the
hyperscalers. These big giant companies
that make up a disproportionate share of
the S&P 500 and they're spending
hundreds of billions of dollars. They're
making a lot of money. When I'm in China
and we talk about about AI, they talk
about the word you use diffusion. They
talk about regular businesses, the
McDonald's of China, Luke and Coffee in
China, regular.
>> We have them in New York City right now
and I tried one and it's very good
actually.
>> Yes. But they those companies are
actively using AI to lower costs. And
you got So why is that happening? I'd
say we're further along. China's further
along than we are. Why? Their margins
are lower. They're doing it out of
necessity. Our margins in the US and our
companies are higher and so they're not
as much pressure to lower costs and make
AI experiments. In China, they don't
have a choice. It's so competitive. They
need to lower costs. But the thing that
struck me, there's a lot to learn from
what they're doing in China. Normally,
if we were a little more globally
integrated, we would learn those things
and bring those those learnings back to
the United States. And it reminded me
that globalization
is not dead. United States is is
choosing to play a different role in it
and stepping back. But I got to tell you
the other thing I saw there is there's
more coupling going on between China uh
and other countries that are
aggressively. Canada is much more
aggressive in trying to form new
partnerships. So I think globalization
and the AI story go together. And I got
to tell you, globalization not going
away and the US is going to have a
choice in the years to come how much of
a role we want to play in participating.
But it's going to happen with us or
without us.
>> So we can sit here and ask you what you
saw in China and what your thoughts were
about China. But I am very aware that
when you go on that type of trip, you
have Chinese clients who are asking you
your thoughts on the US and what's going
on here. What are the type of questions
that you're getting from Chinese clients
at the moment? What are they interested
in? So the biggest item I'd say of
discussion is
uh and and I used to be in Asia for the
first part of my career and what I found
in Korea, Taiwan, China to a large
extent their whole effort was to go from
low value added manufacturing to high
value added manufacturing and they tried
to wean off of lower value added manu
manufacturing. What's an example?
T-shirts and sneakers used to be made in
China. Today they're made in Vietnam.
Why China wants to move up the value
chain? Because their feeling is they're
going to raise the standard of living to
higher value added manufacturing. The
the question sometimes I get when I'm
over there is if you're going to reshore
to the United States, are you going to
really reshore lumber, aluminum,
uh some of these other lower value added
manufacturing?
Uh, wouldn't solidifying the
relationship with Canada and Mexico make
sense where you can get cheap natural
resources from Canada, cheap labor from
Mexico, and solidify North America? And
so I'd say they're not critical of us,
but they're scratching their heads a
little bit to say, "What's the strategic
rationale?" Because you you're tied on
labor. You you normally want to move up
the value chain.
And I think they realize that some of
these tariffs are also intended to help
generate revenue and reduce the deficit.
They understand that. They're just
questioning how strategic it is. Well,
let me ask you a question of the on the
question of what are we going to bring
back in the United States, if anything,
just from your perch at Goldman, do you
see any private money that's come into
the US for fresh sort of I don't know
green field capital investment either in
something low margin or high margin
because the terrorists have changed the
math and made that investment
economical.
>> So I will say there yes is the answer.
Uh I I think there are US companies that
will do more on the margin manufacturing
here. I've talked to overseas companies
including uh I won't mention the name of
one contract manufacturer in China. They
are building more in the United States.
And so the the thing is I don't know how
long it will take what the magnitude
will be. Uh but it yes it is happening.
The the flip side of that is there are
many companies in the US that benefited
from access to lowerc cost goods.
>> Yeah.
>> And I won't mention their name but you
can you know some of them and they are
their margins are being squeezed and
then I talked to a number of small
businesses that don't have the leverage
to manage these tariffs and some of them
will actually go out of business or
considering it by the end of the year.
This is a little bit of an unfair
question, but I'm going to ask it
anyway. If you had to if you had to
choose one right now, would you say that
tariffs are more effective at bringing
back manufacturing to the US or more
effective at raising income for the US
government at a time when people are
worried about the deficit?
>> I think we'll start with the second
part. Uh tariffs
uh raise revenue,
but they slow growth. And so for every
dollar of tariff revenue, you have to
you have to accept you may give some
back and a little bit lower growth. I
think that trade is very much worth it.
Uh if you're bringing back high value
added manufacturing, I don't know if
it's such a good trade if you are
pushing to bring back lower value added.
I think this administration knows that
and I think they'll be more strategic. I
think you can do both. I I think you
could level the playing field, get get a
more tariff revenue or some level of
tariff revenue. Uh I think we were
thinking they were going to be closer to
10% than 20%. You mean the high teens is
a little higher than we expected. And
you can also yes on semiconductors and
other strategic areas you can redomicile
those. I think the question is you sure
you want to go down the road of lumber
and aluminum,
>> right? or do you want to let Canada do
it? Is that a good strategic trade? I I
I'm not sure.
>> Since you mentioned it, why is the
neutral rate of interest to the extent
that we can form some educated guess as
to what it is, why is it so much higher
than it was in say 2019 in your view?
>> So, um
the the fact of the matter is I think if
you go way back in the stone age to
2019,
>> it does seem like forever ago. It does.
I think if we had not had CO
I think at the right before COVID hit
the 10-year Treasury, I think it was in
the neighborhood of maybe 1 and 3/4 to
two. The Fed funds rate was in the mid
ones. I think we would have inched our
way up a little higher.
>> We didn't know how good we had it. All
those people were complaining, oh,
yields are so low. And then now they all
wish they could go back there.
>> Yeah. Uh uh listen the inflation rate
today is stickier. Back in 19 it was
probably one and a half one and
three/4ers. I still think even then the
neutral rate real rate was 3/4 of 1%. So
the neutral fed funds rate back then I
think was 2 1/2ish. Uh today it's closer
to 3 and 1/2. But there's only one
reason for that. The inflation rate's
higher. If inflation got back down to
two, I think you'd see the neutral rate
back down to 2 and 3/4.
[Music]
Since you mentioned sticky inflation,
there's one other thing that seems to be
top of mind at the moment, which is
Federal Reserve independence. Um, and we
should talk about that, but I guess we
can get your thoughts on, you know, that
specific idea in a second. But one thing
that seems surprising so far is that
we're having this debate about what
happens to the Federal Reserve with what
seems to be a more activist Trump
administration that seems to want to
have a heavier hand in monetary policy.
We haven't really seen much much uh
response from the market. If you look at
the long end, it doesn't seem like
there's a big risk premium building
there. What's going on? So let's make
two comments. So regarding uh uh
political independence, let me just make
sure I I I uh frame this. Regulatory
policy at the Fed is not underlying not
politically independent. It hasn't been
for a number of years. What do I mean by
that? You get a new president. They pick
a new head of supervision and it's very
much has been influenced for the last
many years by whoever's in office. The
balance sheet I would argue is maybe a
little bit in the gray area on setting
the Fed funds rate though. The Fed has
been politically independent. Why is the
market you said not reacting more to
this? I mean the reality is the stock
market likes the idea of lower rates. I
think the thing it's not that the
markets aren't reacting. The stock
market likes it. So it's it's starting
now to take into account makes the real
acceleration you talked about more
likely. The gold market is very much
taken note of it and gold is up more
than 35% year to date and I see it's up
another 1% today. So it has and I
actually think duration on the long bond
while while the tenure is rallied
because of slow growth I still think we
have an issue. We've got 37 trillion of
debt to sell on our way to 40 trillion.
I I think that the bond market may pay
at the long end will pay attention to
how this uh current situation works out.
>> What is going on? Uh how much more gold
talk is there these days than there were
a few years ago?
>> Well, I I actually I've gone back over
looked back over the last 50 years.
When's the last time we got a rally in
gold like this?
>> Yeah. I think a in the aftermath of the
great recession, remember in the great
recession the Fed took its balance sheet
from 800 uh billion to 4 trillion, okay?
And stopped and we started to run it
down a little bit. In response to COVID,
we went from 4 trillion to 9 trillion
and we authorized $6 trillion of
extraordinary spending in a 27 trillion
economy. and the GDP uh the net debt to
GDP went from mid70s to over 100%. When
you've got leverage in the United States
and to some some extent in the developed
world getting much higher in response to
co that's where people start to look at
gold, Bitcoin, other alternatives to
paper currency because they're worried
that this leveraging is just keeping
going on and on and on. And so it it's
understandable.
>> Wait, is it though? Because one of the
weird tensions of our current market
situation is we have US stocks at
all-time highs, but also gold making new
records almost every week. It feels like
those two things are incompatible, at
least in the long run. Um, you know,
maybe we could do it for a few weeks or
a few months, but someone's got to be
wrong here. I I spent a lot of time
talking to big institutions and about
asset allocation. I think and this is
our view also. Uh we think there could
be a reaceleration into 26. We think the
AI boom is for real. We think we're
going to get a lot of productivity out
of AI. Okay, that is a good environment
for corporate earnings and for stocks.
What we don't know is how successful
we're going to be on bending the curve
of debt to GDP. Are we going to run
another $2 trillion deficit even with
tariffs? Is it going to be higher? And
in that regard, I think people can buy
stocks and buy gold and be very careful
about buying the 10-year and the 30-year
Treasury. And I think that's kind of
what we're seeing.
>> Actually, I want to go back to your
point about sort of uh globalization is
happening with us or without us. There's
a different approach to AI diffusion out
of China than there is in the US. But
when you go around the world, are the
American providers of tech, whether it's
cloud tech or whether it's Microsoft
etc. are they still are they going to
win even if the US isn't part of that
globalization wave? Will US tech still
be part of the story because so much is
riding on the ongoing earnings power of
seven companies?
>> So I'll make a general comp comment
about US companies generally. A typical
CEO in the United States that runs a
global company has probably been to
Europe in their careers 75 times or more
and has been to Asia 75 times, has been
to China multiple times, has built
relationships and has been doing it for
years. Um, and I think that's true of
tech, no doubt.
>> Uh, many of the tech leaders you see are
overseas regularly. our political
leaders and and some of our leaders in
certain governmental positions uh maybe
have not been to China or overseas quite
as much and that's why you see during
periods like this the corporate world is
continuing to chug along and build
relationships globally even though at at
national level we're sort of reorienting
and trying to um bring more to the
United States and in effect deglobalize.
So we've got a kind of a dichotomy and
it it it stands in sharp relief. This is
the same way even 8 years ago where we
withdrew from the Paris climate accord,
>> right?
>> And yet companies in the United States
from my to my eye did not slow down at
all in trying to build lead certified
buildings and focus on greenhouse gas
emissions and sustainability.
You talked earlier about the difference
between how China and the US um the
corporate sphere is actually using AI.
When you're looking at the US and you're
looking for signs that AI is actually
having a definitive, you know,
needlemoving impact on US productivity,
what are you looking for here? What are
the signs?
>> I'm looking for adoption
in a broad set of industries because
here's here's how this works. First,
your company gets you to try it. Okay.
And you adopt it. Second thing you try
is various use cases based on that
adoption. And then third thing you
figure out which use cases work and
which use cases don't work. We're kind
of in that phase right now in the United
States. When I say China's a little
farther ahead, I think they've already
tried and proven some of the use cases
in more industry. We'll get there too.
But but you'll know when we look back 10
years from now. My guess is maybe not as
fast as other parts of the world. We
will have gone through all that. We'll
know which use cases work, which don't.
We'll adopt them. We're going to get a
lot more efficiencies. There may be as
many or more jobs, but they're going to
shift and we're going to have to
redeploy people to where the open jobs
are, but we have to go through that
whole cycle. And I would say we're
early. We're early in that.
>> We just have a couple minutes left.
Here's something that's been on my mind
a little bit lately that I would like
your take on. How levered to the stock
market is the real US economy? How much
when you look around does it feel like
things are dependent on these companies
continuing to deliver year after year
and positive asset returns?
>> So that's a great question. So I would
say the US is 75% a service economy. It
is a very heavily consumer-driven
economy. This which makes our economy
different from many in the world. And if
you break down the consumer here, half
the workers in this country, let's take
it 8085 million, make $50,000 a year,
are unlikely to have financial assets,
have lost 25% plus purchasing power, and
are struggling to make ends meet.
They're spending every dollar they make.
But if you're a business that serves
them, you're seeing they're being very
careful.
>> Yeah. There's another 80 85 million
consumers tend to be I'm exagger I'm
generalizing 55 and older own their home
have financial assets and and they've
made a lot of money in the markets to
your point and they're spending because
they're getting wealthier and we've got
a tale of two consumer groups. I think
part of what this administration, I
believe, is trying to do is help lift up
this first group so that they can be uh
more affluent and do better because
right now we're very heavily dependent
on this second engine based on the stock
market.
>> All right, I'm going to sneak in one
more question and go back to where we
started this conversation, which is on
rate cuts. I know you said uh 50 basis
point probably not on the table, but
your your gut instinct, is this going to
be the start of a rate cycle, a rate cut
cycle that goes into the next year,
2026, or is this something that, you
know, maybe you get one rate cut, maybe
you get two rate cuts, but it's not
going to go on for much longer than
that.
>> I think it will be, if it's a cycle,
it's going to be a halting cycle. What
do I mean by that? Cut 25 in September.
I think that's going to happen. Wipe the
slate clean for the next 6 weeks. Fed
meets every 6 weeks. Wipe the slate
clean. Make sure that you're convinced
still the labor market is weak. Check
inflation. If it's continued to be weak
and inflation is at least moderate, you
may do another one. Uh the issue I'm
pointing out is I don't think we have
more room to get to neutral than 75 to
100 basis points. So might we wind up
doing two or three this year? Maybe. Are
we going to wind up doing 150 200 base
points? It means you would want you
would have to decide which I don't see a
justification for running a very
stimulative monetary policy. And I think
the Fed as it's currently configured
will be enormously reluctant to to be
below restrictive or modestly
restrictive as long as inflation's
running above target. Rob Kaplan, thank
you so much for doing this live. Lots of
future.
>> Thank you so much.
[Music]
So, that was our episode with Robert
Kaplan recorded live on stage at the
Futureproof Conference. I'm Tracy Aloway
and you can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman Dashel
Bennett at Dashbot and Kalebrooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes and you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we do these live episodes, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]